Add helm chart documentation (#14133)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/installation/kubernetes.rst

===================
Trino on Kubernetes
===================

`Kubernetes <https://kubernetes.io>`_ is a container orchestration platform that
allows you to deploy Trino and other applications in a repeatable manner across
different types of infrastructure. This can range from deploying on your laptop

> using tools like `KIND <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_ and

Reviewer: `kind` in lowercase, per https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/

`Helm <https://helm.sh>`_, to running on a managed Kubernetes service on the
major clouds like `Amazon EKS <https://aws.amazon.com/eks>`_,
`Google GKE <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine>`_, and

> `Azure AKS <https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/kubernetes-service>`_.

Reviewer: GKE means Google Kubernetes Engine, so saying Google GKE seems wrong. Same for Azure Kubernetes Service. Maybe don't use abbreviations.

Reviewer 2: Agreed...lets use the long form names for all of them  Amazon Elastics Kubernetes Service (EKS) 

see https://docs.starburst.io/starburst-enterprise/k8s/index.html for list

> This is valuable in that it allows you to prototype on you local or on-premise
> cluster and use the same deployment mechanism to deploy to the cloud to scale up
> your deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows you to prototype on your local or on-premise
cluster and use the same deployment mechanism to deploy to the cloud to scale up
your deployment.
```

Prerequisites
-------------
* A running Kubernetes cluster
    * For local deployments, we recommend using `KIND <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_
* `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl>`_

> * `helm <https://helm.sh>`_

Reviewer: Maybe explain that here we mean the `helm` binary.

Running Trino using Helm
------------------------

The fastest way to run Trino on Kubernetes is to use the
`Trino Helm chart <https://github.com/trinodb/charts>`_. Helm is a package
manager for Kubernetes applications that allows for simpler installation and
versioning by templating Kubernetes configuration files. Run the following

> commands from the system with ``helm`` and ``kubectl`` installed, that points to
> your running Kubernetes cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
commands from the system with ``helm`` and ``kubectl`` installed, configured to connect to
your running Kubernetes cluster:
```

#. Add the Trino Helm chart repository to Helm. This tells Helm where to find
   the Trino charts. You can name the repo whatever you want but we will use
   ``trino``.

   .. code-block:: text

       helm repo add trino https://trinodb.github.io/charts

#. Install the Trino helm chart. This fetches the template and uses the local
   ``values.yaml`` file to populate the templates to generate the Kubernetes
   configuration files.

   .. code-block:: text

       helm install my-trino-cluster trino/trino

   You should see output as follows:

   .. code-block:: text

       NAME: my-trino-cluster
       LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Sep 13 14:12:09 2022
       NAMESPACE: default
       STATUS: deployed
       REVISION: 1
       TEST SUITE: None
       NOTES:
       Get the application URL by running these commands:
         export POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods --namespace default -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o jsonpath="{.items[0].metadata.name}")
         echo "Visit http://127.0.0.1:8080 to use your application"
         kubectl port-forward $POD_NAME 8080:8080

   This output will differ based on your ``values.yaml`` configuration and

>    cluster name. For example, the port ``8080`` is set by the

Reviewer: Is it worth noting that this default Trino installation is not secured with any authentication, but also does not install any ingress rule that would expose it?

Author: Gonna default to @mosabua on this one. I think it wouldn't hurt, but I also don't want to drown anyone who wants to jump in with too much info.

       pod/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6-tcqgb       1/1     Running   0          161m

       NAME                       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP    EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
       service/my-trino-cluster   ClusterIP   10.96.25.35   <none>        8080/TCP   161m

       NAME                                           READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
       deployment.apps/my-trino-cluster-coordinator   1/1     1            1           161m
       deployment.apps/my-trino-cluster-worker        2/2     2            2           161m

       NAME                                                     DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-coordinator-bfb74c98d   1         1         1       161m
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6       2         2         2       161m

Executing queries
-----------------

The pods running the Trino containers are all running on a private network
internal to Kubernetes. In order to access them, specifically the coordinator,
you will need to create a tunnel to the exposed service and your computer. You
can do this by running the commands generated upon installation.

> #. Store the coordinator pod name in a shell variable called ``POD_NAME``.

Reviewer: Would it be simpler to describe how to execute the cli directly inside the coordinator pod using `kubectl exec`?

Reviewer 2: No .. thats an anti-pattern we do not want to encourage

   :ref:`Install the command-line interface <cli-installation>`, and connect to
   Trino.

   .. code-block:: text

       ./trino --server http://localhost:8080

#. Using the generated benchmark data in the ``tpch`` catalog, type and execute
   a query on the ``nation`` table using the scale factor schema, ``sf1``. Try
   other commands to explore this data set:

   .. code-block:: text

       $ trino> select count(*) from tpch.sf1.nation;
        _col0
       -------
         25
       (1 row)

       Query 20181105_001601_00002_e6r6y, FINISHED, 1 node
       Splits: 21 total, 21 done (100.00%)
       0:06 [25 rows, 0B] [4 rows/s, 0B/s]

#. Once you are done with your exploration, enter the ``quit`` command.

Configuring Helm for Trino
--------------------------

The :doc:`container image </installation/containers>` already contains a
default configuration to get started, and some catalogs to allow you to explore
Trino. You can customize these configuration by updating the ``values.yaml``
file.

The ``values.yaml`` has various properties that, when not empty, will create
configuration files in the ``/etc/trino`` directory structure as created in the

> :doc:`/installation/deployment`. One common configuration request is to add

Reviewer: This assumes the reader has any idea that Trino uses configuration files. Maybe we shouldn't, at least at the beginning of this section. Linking to the deployment might be a useful reference but at the end of this section.

Author: I'm confused about how moving it to the end of the section helps. I imagine linking this where it is, actually sheds light on how Trino is configured if they so desire to click.

Reviewer: My point is that when using the chart you don't mount config files anywhere but put them inside values.yaml. If we're not explicit about it, it can be confusing for people new to Trino.

Author: Yeah, but we should be clear that the values added to the values.yaml correlates to configuration files that are installed on each Trino node. Anywhere else they look in the docs we will be referring to configuration properties files and that could get confusing if they don't know the basic installation method. So that's why I point them there to make sure they get educated.

I do see your point though, so maybe it would make sense to just clarify more. Maybe adding a paragraph to say something like:
> Kubernetes allows you to mimic a [traditional deployment](https://trino.io/docs/current/installation/deployment.html) by updating the `values.yaml` file. It's important to understand how files such as the Trino configuration, JVM, and various catalog properties are configured in Trino before continuing.

Then after that, we can assume the reader will know to look for this before getting to this section. WDYT?

Reviewer: Sounds great!

Reviewer 2: Yeah ... maybe just rephrase .. the values file is just a template and helm creates the config files from it on the containers

> custom catalogs to the kubernetes deployment. You can do this by adding values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
custom catalogs to the Kubernetes deployment. You can do this by adding values
```

> to the ``additionalCatalogs`` property in the ``values.yaml`` file.

Author: I want to do a much fuller list of all the properties. I'm struggling about where we do it thought. We have a list of properties on the [Trino Charts GitHub](https://github.com/trinodb/charts/tree/main/charts/trino#configuration) which propagates to the readme seen on the [Trino ArtifactHub page](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/trino/trino). I kind of want to add the descriptions there and then link to that readme from these docs. WDYT @mosabua?

Reviewer: This page should not be the reference, the Chart readme should. I'd add just one more section, about configuring the number of Trino nodes, and their resource requests and limits.

Reviewer 2: Agreed ... but we can and should also help on the chart repo and in fact from there link to this page once its live..

Author: Cool so we all agree that we maintain the properties there and that we should link to those properties from this document. I like that a lot as it maintains a single location and is visible from GitHub and ArfifactHub.

===================
Trino on Kubernetes
===================

`Kubernetes <https://kubernetes.io>`_ is a container orchestration platform that
allows you to deploy Trino and other applications in a repeatable manner across
different types of infrastructure. This can range from deploying on your laptop
using tools like `kind <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_ and
`Helm <https://helm.sh>`_, to running on a managed Kubernetes service on the
major clouds like
`Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service <https://aws.amazon.com/eks>`_,
`Google Kubernetes Engine <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine>`_, and
`Azure Kubernetes Service <https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/kubernetes-service>`_.
This allows you to prototype on your local or on-premise cluster and use the
same deployment mechanism to deploy to the cloud to scale up your deployment.

Prerequisites
-------------

> * A running Kubernetes cluster

Author: @hashhar may know?

    * For local deployments, we recommend using `kind <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_
* Install the `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl>`_
binary

> * Instal the `helm <https://helm.sh>`_ binary

Author: ```suggestion
* Install the `helm <https://helm.sh>`_ binary
```

> 

Author: should I use running kind as the example here then?

   configuration files.

   .. code-block:: text

       helm install my-trino-cluster trino/trino

   You should see output as follows:

   .. code-block:: text

       NAME: my-trino-cluster
       LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Sep 13 14:12:09 2022
       NAMESPACE: default
       STATUS: deployed
       REVISION: 1
       TEST SUITE: None
       NOTES:
       Get the application URL by running these commands:
         export POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods --namespace default -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o jsonpath="{.items[0].metadata.name}")
         echo "Visit http://127.0.0.1:8080 to use your application"
         kubectl port-forward $POD_NAME 8080:8080

   This output will differ based on your ``values.yaml`` configuration and
   cluster name. For example, the port ``8080`` is set by the
   ``.Values.service.port`` in the ``values.yaml``. Other values like the
   ``.Values.image.tag`` dictate the container image tag which defaults to
   ``latest``.

#. Run ``kubectl get all`` to check that all pods, deployments, and services are
   running properly. You should see expect to see output that shows running pods

>    and deployments and replicasets in the ready state.

Reviewer 2: Explain a bit more what these show

       pod/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6-hvl8n       1/1     Running   0          161m
       pod/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6-tcqgb       1/1     Running   0          161m

       NAME                       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP    EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
       service/my-trino-cluster   ClusterIP   10.96.25.35   <none>        8080/TCP   161m

       NAME                                           READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
       deployment.apps/my-trino-cluster-coordinator   1/1     1            1           161m
       deployment.apps/my-trino-cluster-worker        2/2     2            2           161m

       NAME                                                     DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-coordinator-bfb74c98d   1         1         1       161m
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6       2         2         2       161m

Executing queries
-----------------

The pods running the Trino containers are all running on a private network
internal to Kubernetes. In order to access them, specifically the coordinator,

> you will need to create a tunnel to the exposed service and your computer. You

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you need to create a tunnel to the exposed service and your computer. You
```

Reviewer 2: Do we really want to recommend a tunnel? How about just setting up ingress properly including https? What do you think @nineinchnick ?

Also . this could be all in the Configuration section instead and then we can just link to it from a "Connect with the CLI section" or so .. that mostly links to the CLI docs .

And have similar ones for JDBC apps or whatever.

Author: For this one, let's just start with doing the tunnel method to get this merged, and we can add a more sophisticated method using Ingress types later.

can do this by running the commands generated upon installation.

#. Store the coordinator pod name in a shell variable called ``POD_NAME``.

   .. code-block:: text

       export POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods --namespace default -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o jsonpath="{.items[0].metadata.name}")

#. Create the tunnel from the service to the client. After you run this you can
   connect to the Trino coordinator at ``http://localhost:8080``.

   .. code-block:: text

       kubectl port-forward $POD_NAME 8080:8080

#. To connect to Trino, you can use the :doc:`/client/cli` or your favorite
   client that supports using a :doc:`/client/jdbc`.
   :ref:`Install the command-line interface <cli-installation>`, and connect to
   Trino.

   .. code-block:: text

>        ./trino --server http://localhost:8080

Reviewer 2: should we just use

```
trino --server... 
```

at least as alternative we should also show it with URL of the coordinator

#. Using the generated benchmark data in the ``tpch`` catalog, type and execute
   a query on the ``nation`` table using the scale factor schema, ``sf1``. Try
   other commands to explore this data set:

   .. code-block:: text

       $ trino> select count(*) from tpch.sf1.nation;
        _col0
       -------
         25
       (1 row)

       Query 20181105_001601_00002_e6r6y, FINISHED, 1 node
       Splits: 21 total, 21 done (100.00%)
       0:06 [25 rows, 0B] [4 rows/s, 0B/s]

#. Once you are done with your exploration, enter the ``quit`` command.

> Configuring Helm for Trino

Reviewer 2: Just "Configuration"  should do

Reviewer 2: I think minimal config needs to be higher up and include memory, ingress and one catalog .. and then this section can go into more other details

--------------------------

The :doc:`container image </installation/containers>` already contains a

> default configuration to get started, and some catalogs to allow you to explore

Reviewer 2: you probably need to explain somewhere that the chart uses the container image..

Trino. You can customize these configuration by updating the ``values.yaml``
file.

> 

Author: Remove extra line

The ``values.yaml`` has various properties that, when not empty, will create
configuration files in the ``/etc/trino`` directory structure as created in the
:doc:`/installation/deployment`. One common configuration request is to add
custom catalogs to the Kubernetes deployment. You can do this by adding values
to the ``additionalCatalogs`` property in the ``values.yaml`` file.

.. code-block:: yaml

    additionalCatalogs:

>       iceberg.properties: |-

Reviewer 2: lakehouse.properties 

or whatever.. just do NOT use the connector name

        connector.name=iceberg
        hive.metastore.uri=thrift://example.net:9083

>       postgresql.properties: |-

Reviewer 2: rdbms.properties ?

        connector.name=postgresql
        connection-url=jdbc:postgresql://example.net:5432/database
        connection-user=root
        connection-password=secret

> This will add both ``iceberg`` and ``postgresql`` catalogs to the Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This add the ``lakehouse`` and ``rdbms`` catalogs to the Kubernetes
```

=============================
Trino on Kubernetes with Helm
=============================

`Kubernetes <https://kubernetes.io>`_ is a container orchestration platform that
allows you to deploy Trino and other applications in a repeatable manner across
different types of infrastructure. This can range from deploying on your laptop
using tools like `kind <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_ and
`Helm <https://helm.sh>`_, to running on a managed Kubernetes service on cloud
services like
`Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service <https://aws.amazon.com/eks>`_,

> `Google Kubernetes Engine <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine>`_, and
> `Azure Kubernetes Service <https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/kubernetes-service>`_.

Reviewer 3: nit:

```suggestion
`Google Kubernetes Engine <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine>`_,
`Azure Kubernetes Service <https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/kubernetes-service>`_ and others.
```

The fastest way to run Trino on Kubernetes is to use the
`Trino Helm chart <https://github.com/trinodb/charts>`_. Helm is a package
manager for Kubernetes applications that allows for simpler installation and
versioning by templating Kubernetes configuration files. This allows you to
prototype on your local or on-premise cluster and use the same deployment
mechanism to deploy to the cloud to scale up.

Prerequisites
-------------

> * Have a running Kubernetes cluster with a version that falls within
>   `the Kubernetes support window <https://kubernetes.io/releases/>`_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* A Kubernetes cluster with a `supported version <https://kubernetes.io/releases/>`_ of Kubernetes.
```

>   * For local deployments, we recommend using

Reviewer: ```
28:28   warning     Try to avoid using              Google.We       
                    first-person plural like 'we'.  
```
```suggestion
  * For local deployments, you can use
```

Reviewer 3: I agree with Jan's language anyway - we don't "recommend" anything in this case. Up to the user how they want to do it - we can just document some of the many possible ways.

>   * For local deployments, we recommend using

Reviewer 3: This is not a pre-requisite by definition. I'd suggest adding a paragraph for `Local deployment` which talks about `kind` + `docker`.

Author: Agreed will do

Author: Done

    `kind (Kubernetes in Docker) <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_, which depends on
    `Docker <https://www.docker.com>`_ to be installed as well. To run a
    Kubernetes cluster in kind, run the command:

    .. code-block:: text

       kind create cluster --name trino

    .. note::

        The ``name`` parameter here is optional but is just used to showcase
        how the namespace is applied in future commands. The cluster name

>         defaults to ``kind`` if no parameter is added. We recommend using
>         ``trino`` to make the application on this cluster obvious.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        defaults to ``kind`` if no parameter is added. Use
        ``trino`` to make the application on this cluster obvious.
```

> * Install the `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl>`_
>   binary. Ensure you have a kubectl version that adheres to the
>   `Kubernetes version skew policy <https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/>`_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl>`_
  binary. Ensure that the version of ``kubectl`` adheres to the
  `Kubernetes version skew policy <https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/>`_.
```

> * Install the `helm <https://helm.sh>`_ binary. Ensure that you have a helm
>   version that adheres to the `Helm version skew policy <https://helm.sh/docs/topics/version_skew/>`_ that
>   supports the version of Kubernetes you are running.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `helm <https://helm.sh>`_ binary. Ensure that the version of ``helm``
  adheres to the `Helm version skew policy <https://helm.sh/docs/topics/version_skew/>`_.
```

Running Trino using Helm
------------------------

Run the following commands from the system with ``helm`` and ``kubectl``
installed and configured to connect to your running Kubernetes cluster:

#. Validate kubectl is pointing to the correct cluster by running the command:

   .. code-block:: text

>       kubectl cluster-info --context=kind-trino

Reviewer 3: why `kind-trino`? This section is generic and not only for local deployments.

Author: Fixed

   .. note::

      The ``context`` parameter here is optional and references the cluster

>       created in the example using kind above. ``kubectl`` will use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      created in the preceding example using kind. ``kubectl`` uses the
```

      `default context <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#kubectl-context-and-configuration>`_
      if this parameter isn't supplied. Notice the context is the name of the

>       cluster with the ``kind-`` prefix added.

Reviewer 3: If we have separate paragraph about `kind` such notes will not be needed and reading the doc would feel more linear instead of looking at something then looking and notes and adjusting your steps accordingly.

Author: Done

   You should see similar output with a random port assigned if you are
   running on kind.

   .. code-block:: text

      Kubernetes control plane is running at https://127.0.0.1:59553

>       CoreDNS is running at https://127.0.0.1:59553/api/v1/namespaces/kube-system/services/kube-dns:dns/proxy

Reviewer 3: Let's avoid this - we don't explain what the output means or how it's significant anyway.
How do I know from the output that I am using correct k8s cluster?
If we keep this then it needs a bit more explanation.

Also this output will differ depending on how you have k8s deployed - so another reason to have separate kind paragraph.

Author: I do agree having the specific output could be confusing so I'll remove that. I do think having a validation step where we say that they should be able to run a command that outputs the control plane url is fair. We link them to kubernetes documentation in the explanation above and I think it is out of scope to explain the details of this output. When they are getting started, seeing some output that is local or has a url containing the domain they're expecting should be simple enough.

#. (Optional) Create ``values.yaml`` file to define the parameters of your
   deployment.

   The helm chart has a `set of default values <https://github.com/trinodb/charts/blob/main/charts/trino/values.yaml>`_

>    that are used if you don't specify your own ``values.yaml`` file. When you
>    create this file, you will override only the values you specify. The
>    remaining properties will remain as the default. Add a ``values.yaml``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   that are used if you don't specify your own ``values.yaml`` file. When you
   create this file, you override only the values you specify. The
   remaining properties keep their default values. Add a ``values.yaml``
```

>    that are used if you don't specify your own ``values.yaml`` file. When you
>    create this file, you will override only the values you specify. The
>    remaining properties will remain as the default. Add a ``values.yaml``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   that are used if you don't specify your own ``values.yaml`` file. If you specify
   your own ``values.yaml`` it will override only the values you specify. The
   remaining properties will use their default values. Add a ``values.yaml``
```

   with the following configuration:

   .. code-block:: yaml

      image:
        tag: "|trino_version|"
      server:
        workers: 2
        config:
          memory:
            heapHeadroomPerNode: "1GB"
          query:
            maxMemory: "4GB"
            maxMemoryPerNode: "1GB"
      coordinator:
        jvm:
          maxHeapSize: "8G"
      worker:
        jvm:
          maxHeapSize: "8G"

>    Let's explain what these values do and some useful notes.

Reviewer: This only explains the mapping between `values.yaml` and Trino properties, but maybe it should mention _why_ this is a good example. Like:
> These values are higher than the defaults and allow Trino to use more memory and run more demanding queries. If the values were too high, Kubernetes might not be able to schedule some Trino pods, depending on other applications deployed in the case cluster and the size of the cluster nodes.

Reviewer: Also:
```
 107:4   warning     Try to avoid using              Google.We       
                     first-person plural like                        
                     'Let's'.   
```

>    #. ``.Values.image.tag`` is set to the current version, |trino_version|. Set

Reviewer: Is the `.Values` key valid in this context?

Author: hmm not sure...this is how I see it used when describing Values configs in other Kubernetes docs so I was copycatting but I am happy to remove as most will likely get confused by this. Thoughts @mosabua ?

Reviewer: This is how they're referenced in the chart itself, but here you refer to keys in the `values.yaml` file directly.

      this value if you need to use a specific version of Trino. The default is
      ``latest``.
   #. ``.Values.server.workers`` is set to ``2``. This value sets the number of

>       workers, in this case, a coordinator and two worker nodes will get
>       deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      workers, in this case, a coordinator and two worker nodes are
      deployed.
```

   #. ``.Values.server.config.memory.heapHeadroomPerNode`` is set to ``1GB``.
      This sets the :ref:`prop-resource-memory-heap-headroom-per-node` property.
   #. ``.Values.server.config.query.maxMemory`` is set to ``4GB``.
      This sets the :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory` property.
   #. ``.Values.server.config.query.maxMemoryPerNode`` is set to ``1GB``.
      This sets the :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory-per-node` property.
   #. ``.Values.coordinator.jvm.maxHeapSize`` is set to ``8GB``.

>       This sets the ``Xmx`` property in the :ref:`jvm_config` on the

Reviewer 3: `Xmx` is more cryptic than saying maximum heap memory that the cooridinator's JVM can use. Also most people interacting with Helm may not know what Xmx means. Either link to someplace to simplify.

Same for below.

      coordinator.
   #. ``.Values.worker.jvm.maxHeapSize`` is set to ``8GB``.
      This sets the ``Xmx`` property in the :ref:`jvm_config` on the
      worker.

      .. warning::
         When updating memory configurations, you need to make sure that
         :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory` is greater than
         :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory-per-node`. Also make sure that the
         sum of :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory-per-node` and
         :ref:`prop-resource-memory-heap-headroom-per-node` is less than the

>          ``Xmx`` property in the :ref:`jvm_config`.

Reviewer 3: There is not `Xmx` property and no `jvm.config` in Helm land (at-least directly exposed).

> #. Add the Trino Helm chart repository to Helm if you haven't done so already.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be the first step? It only has to be done once.

Author: Yeah, I suppose it could be. I think maybe validating kubectl is also a good first step. This can definitely be the second. It forces you to validate your tools are working before getting started with any configs.

Reviewer 2: Either order is fine .. you could even argue that you these are prerequisites.. but thats splitting hairs.. good as it imho

>    This tells Helm where to find the Trino charts. You can name the repo
>    whatever you want but we suggest using ``trino``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This tells Helm where to find the Trino charts. You can name the repository
   whatever you want, ``trino`` is a good choice.
```

Reviewer 3: Might also be better to say that "the rest of the instructions assume the repository is named ``trino``" instead.

   .. code-block:: text

       helm repo add trino https://trinodb.github.io/charts

#. Install Trino on the Kubernetes cluster using the Helm chart. This generates
   the Kubernetes configuration files by inserting properties into helm
   templates. Helm requires default values but can be optionally overridden by a
   ``values.yaml`` file to update default behavior. Run the following command to

>    use all default values and create a cluster called ``my-trino-cluster``.

Reviewer 3: nit: It seems we have pre-existing convention of showing what to do then explaining what that does but this does it the other way around.

Author: Fixed

   .. code-block:: text

       helm install my-trino-cluster trino/trino

>    To override the default values, you can use the ``values.yaml`` created in

Reviewer: It reads weird. The step where the `values.yaml` file was created is optional, but if the user decided to do it anyway (if they weren't sure if it's needed), they might not use it now. Maybe break this up into two steps, first mention how to deploy with defaults and then how to set values and deploy with them?

Author: Okay, so I nested the "Create values.yaml" step into the "Install Kubernetes" step. I first show deploying with default as you suggest, and then in the same stop have an optional section on creating the values.yaml

Reviewer 3: It's still confusing for someone who is new.

I'd still recommend breaking into two steps:

- Install locally with defaults using `kind` - run a few queries and give sense of accomplishment.
- Then talk about non-kind deployments with non-default values.

   the previous step.

   .. code-block:: text

       helm install -f values.yaml my-trino-cluster trino/trino

   You should see output as follows:

   .. code-block:: text

       NAME: my-trino-cluster
       LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Sep 13 14:12:09 2022
       NAMESPACE: default
       STATUS: deployed
       REVISION: 1
       TEST SUITE: None
       NOTES:
       Get the application URL by running these commands:
         export POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods --namespace default -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o jsonpath="{.items[0].metadata.name}")
         echo "Visit http://127.0.0.1:8080 to use your application"
         kubectl port-forward $POD_NAME 8080:8080

>    This output will differ based on your ``values.yaml`` configuration and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This output depends on your ``values.yaml`` configuration and
```

   cluster name. For example, the port ``8080`` is set by the
   ``.Values.service.port`` in the ``values.yaml``.

#. Run the following command to check that all pods, deployments, and services are
   running properly.

   .. code-block:: text

>       kubectl get all

Reviewer: So far in this doc most commands were using some optional namespaces and contexts. Maybe we could use something like this here, a namespace or a label selector to make sure we only list resources owned by the Trino chart?

Author: ah, should use a context yes thanks

>    You should see expect to see output that shows running pods
>    and deployments and replicasets in the ready state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You should expect to see output that shows running pods,
   deployments, and replica sets in the ready state.
```

   .. code-block:: text

       NAME                                               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
       pod/my-trino-cluster-coordinator-bfb74c98d-rnrxd   1/1     Running   0          161m
       pod/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6-hvl8n       1/1     Running   0          161m
       pod/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6-tcqgb       1/1     Running   0          161m

       NAME                       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP    EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
       service/my-trino-cluster   ClusterIP   10.96.25.35   <none>        8080/TCP   161m

       NAME                                           READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
       deployment.apps/my-trino-cluster-coordinator   1/1     1            1           161m
       deployment.apps/my-trino-cluster-worker        2/2     2            2           161m

       NAME                                                     DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-coordinator-bfb74c98d   1         1         1       161m
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6       2         2         2       161m

>    * The top three lines are pods. These are the actual Trino containers running.

Reviewer: Pods are not containers.
```suggestion
   * The top three lines are pods. These include the actual Trino containers running.
```

Author: good distinction, thanks

   * The next line is the service. This is the method Kubernetes makes internal

>      services like the one running on the coordinator accessible outside of the

Reviewer: No, a `ClusterIP` service does not make the service accessible outside. It only makes it accessible inside the cluster via a name, instead of IPs.

Author: I'd love to pick your brain about these...I've been confused on services for a while now.

     cluster.

>    * The next two lines are the deployments. Deployments can have multiple pods.
>      In the case of ``my-trino-cluster-worker`` deployment, there are multiple
>      pods. Notice the ``my-trino-cluster-coordinator`` will always have one pod.
>      Deployments also contain replica sets, but also encompass logic around how
>      upgrades and maintenance are performed.

Reviewer: Deployments manage replica sets, which manage pods, so technically deployments don't include pods directly. How about:
```suggestion
   * The next two lines are the deployments. Deployments encompass logic around how
     upgrades are performed, and manage pods through replica sets.
     In the case of ``my-trino-cluster-worker`` deployment, there are multiple
     pods. Notice the ``my-trino-cluster-coordinator`` will always have one pod.
```

   * The final two lines are the replica sets. This defines how many instances

>      of a given pod should be available during a ready state. This is the way
>      you will scale out your workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     of a given pod should be available during a ready state. This is the way
     you scale out your workers.
```

#. If all pods, deployments, and replica sets are running and in the ready
   state, Trino has been successfully deployed.

.. note::

      Unlike most Kubernetes applications, where it's better to have many small
      pods, Trino works best with fewer pods with more resources available. Keep
      this in mind when configuring your Kubernetes cluster.

Executing queries
-----------------

The pods running the Trino containers are all running on a private network
internal to Kubernetes. In order to access them, specifically the coordinator,

> you need to create a tunnel to the exposed service and your computer. You can do

Reviewer: Below, you don't create a tunnel to the service, but to the pod.
```suggestion
you need to create a tunnel to the coordinator pod and your computer. You can do
```

this by running the commands generated upon installation.

#. Store the coordinator pod name in a shell variable called ``POD_NAME``.

   .. code-block:: text

>        export POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods --namespace default -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o jsonpath="{.items[0].metadata.name}")

Reviewer: I'd only keep the namespace if it was included in the `helm install` command, but it's not. Also, `-o name`, and the variable does not need to be exported.
```suggestion
       POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o name)
```

   Trino.

   .. code-block:: text

       trino --server http://localhost:8080

#. Using the generated benchmark data in the ``tpch`` catalog, type and execute
   a query on the ``nation`` table using the scale factor schema, ``sf1``. Try
   other commands to explore this data set:

   .. code-block:: text

       $ trino> select count(*) from tpch.sf1.nation;
        _col0
       -------
         25
       (1 row)

       Query 20181105_001601_00002_e6r6y, FINISHED, 1 node
       Splits: 21 total, 21 done (100.00%)
       0:06 [25 rows, 0B] [4 rows/s, 0B/s]

#. Once you are done with your exploration, enter the ``quit`` command.

Configuration
-------------

The helm chart uses the :doc:`Trino container image </installation/containers>`
by default. The Docker image already contains a default configuration to get
started, and some catalogs to allow you to explore Trino. Kubernetes allows you
to mimic a :doc:`traditional deployment </installation/deployment>` by updating
the ``values.yaml`` file. It's important to understand how files such as the
Trino configuration, JVM, and various catalog properties are configured in Trino
before updating the values.

> The ``values.yaml`` has various properties that, when not empty, will create
> configuration files in the ``/etc/trino`` directory structure as created in the
> :doc:`/installation/deployment`. One common configuration request is to add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``values.yaml`` has various properties that, when not empty, create
configuration files in the ``/etc/trino`` directory structure as created in the
:doc:`/installation/deployment`. One common configuration request is to add
```

   Trino.

   .. code-block:: text

       trino --server http://localhost:8080

#. Using the generated benchmark data in the ``tpch`` catalog, type and execute
   a query on the ``nation`` table using the scale factor schema, ``sf1``. Try
   other commands to explore this data set:

   .. code-block:: text

       $ trino> select count(*) from tpch.sf1.nation;
        _col0
       -------
         25
       (1 row)

       Query 20181105_001601_00002_e6r6y, FINISHED, 1 node
       Splits: 21 total, 21 done (100.00%)
       0:06 [25 rows, 0B] [4 rows/s, 0B/s]

#. Once you are done with your exploration, enter the ``quit`` command.

Configuration
-------------

The helm chart uses the :doc:`Trino container image </installation/containers>`
by default. The Docker image already contains a default configuration to get
started, and some catalogs to allow you to explore Trino. Kubernetes allows you
to mimic a :doc:`traditional deployment </installation/deployment>` by updating
the ``values.yaml`` file. It's important to understand how files such as the
Trino configuration, JVM, and various catalog properties are configured in Trino

> before updating the values.

Reviewer 3: a link to some parent page under which such information can be found?

      :ref:`prop-resource-memory-heap-headroom-per-node` is less than the
      maximum heap size property in the :ref:`jvm_config`.

The ``values.yaml`` has various properties that, when not empty, create
configuration files in the ``/etc/trino`` directory structure as created in the
:doc:`/installation/deployment`. One common configuration request is to add
custom catalogs to the Kubernetes deployment. You can do this by adding values
to the ``additionalCatalogs`` property in the ``values.yaml`` file.

.. code-block:: yaml

    additionalCatalogs:
      lakehouse.properties: |-
        connector.name=iceberg
        hive.metastore.uri=thrift://example.net:9083
      rdbms.properties: |-
        connector.name=postgresql
        connection-url=jdbc:postgresql://example.net:5432/database
        connection-user=root
        connection-password=secret

This adds both ``lakehouse`` and ``rdbms`` catalogs to the Kubernetes deployment
configuration.

.. _running-a-local-kubernetes-cluster-with-kind:

Running a local Kubernetes cluster with kind
--------------------------------------------

For local deployments, you can optionally use

> `kind (Kubernetes in Docker) <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_, which depends on
> `Docker <https://www.docker.com>`_ to be installed as well. To run a Kubernetes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`kind (Kubernetes in Docker) <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_. To run a Kubernetes
```

Then mention checking for docker installation as one of the steps below.

.. code-block:: text

   kind create cluster --name trino

.. note::

   The ``name`` parameter here is optional but is just used to showcase how
   the namespace is applied in future commands. The cluster name defaults to
   ``kind`` if no parameter is added. Use ``trino`` to make the application on
   this cluster obvious.

After the ``create`` command is executed, kind adds a setting in the
``~/.kube/config`` file that will point tools like ``kubectl`` to interface
with the
`control plane <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/glossary/#term-control-plane>`_
service running in the Kubernetes cluster created that runs on Docker. If you
have multiple Kubernetes clusters that already exist in this file, you may
need to use the ``context`` parameter to validate the ``kubectl`` correctly
interacts with the local kind cluster.

.. code-block:: text

   kubectl cluster-info --context kind-trino

The ``context`` parameter here is optional and references the cluster created
using kind. ``kubectl`` uses the
`default context <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#kubectl-context-and-configuration>`_
if this parameter isn't supplied. Notice the context is the name of the

> cluster with the ``kind-`` prefix added.

Reviewer 3: this seems to repeat what we said above in different words.

=============================
Trino on Kubernetes with Helm
=============================

`Kubernetes <https://kubernetes.io>`_ is a container orchestration platform that
allows you to deploy Trino and other applications in a repeatable manner across
different types of infrastructure. This can range from deploying on your laptop
using tools like `kind <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_ and

> `Helm <https://helm.sh>`_, to running on a managed Kubernetes service on cloud

Reviewer 2: drop helm reference here since it is not related to kind and local deployment

services like
`Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service <https://aws.amazon.com/eks>`_,
`Google Kubernetes Engine <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine>`_,
`Azure Kubernetes Service <https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/kubernetes-service>`_,
and others.

The fastest way to run Trino on Kubernetes is to use the

> `Trino Helm chart <https://github.com/trinodb/charts>`_. Helm is a package

Reviewer 2: Link to helm website here as first mention of Helm

manager for Kubernetes applications that allows for simpler installation and
versioning by templating Kubernetes configuration files. This allows you to
prototype on your local or on-premise cluster and use the same deployment
mechanism to deploy to the cloud to scale up.

Prerequisites
-------------

* A Kubernetes cluster with a
  `supported version <https://kubernetes.io/releases/>`_ of Kubernetes.

  * If you don't have a Kubernetes cluster, you can
    :ref:`run one locally using kind <running-a-local-kubernetes-cluster-with-kind>`.

> * The `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl>`_ binary.

Reviewer 2: Check how we say this elsewhere 

basically you need kubectl and helm installed and available on the PATH on the machine you use to manager the deployment on k8s

Having the binary ... doesnt really mean enough .. I have it on a sd card.. so what..

Author: Going to base it off this: https://trino.io/docs/current/connector/postgresql.html

Author: Renaming to requirements

Author: Also following the next comment

  Ensure that the version of ``kubectl`` adheres to the
  `Kubernetes version skew policy <https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/>`_.

* The `helm <https://helm.sh>`_ binary. Ensure that the version of ``helm``
  adheres to the `Helm version skew policy <https://helm.sh/docs/topics/version_skew/>`_.

Running Trino using Helm
------------------------

> Run the following commands from the system with ``helm`` and ``kubectl``

Reviewer 2: this is good and hints towards the right wording for the requirements

installed and configured to connect to your running Kubernetes cluster:

#. Validate kubectl is pointing to the correct cluster by running the command:

   .. code-block:: text

      kubectl cluster-info

   You should see output that shows the correct Kubernetes control plane
   address.

#. Add the Trino Helm chart repository to Helm if you haven't done so already.
   This tells Helm where to find the Trino charts. You can name the repository
   whatever you want, ``trino`` is a good choice.

   .. code-block:: text

       helm repo add trino https://trinodb.github.io/charts

#. Install Trino on the Kubernetes cluster using the Helm chart. Start by
   running the ``install`` command to use all default values and create
   a cluster called ``my-trino-cluster``.

   .. code-block:: text

       helm install my-trino-cluster trino/trino

   This generates the Kubernetes configuration files by inserting properties

>    into helm templates. The helm chart contains

Reviewer 2: Helm or helm ? .. I think "Helm" is the name of the tool .. "helm" is just the command you type .. to then its Helm charts and Helm templates

   `default values <https://trinodb.github.io/charts/charts/trino/>`_

>    that can be overridden by a ``values.yaml`` file to update default settings.

Reviewer 2: ideally dont use the filename "values.yaml" .. instead use one specific for the cluster ./ deployment you want to manage .. just think about how you would name it if you managed multiple clusters from the same mahcine and checked in the yaml files into a git repo

Reviewer 2: also .. you can have many files passed in

Author: I want to avoid showing many files passed in option as it's not required to deploy Trino. They can learn that on the k8s docs for now until there's a common use case or pattern for deploying Trino that uses this. 

Rather than update the filenames as you've suggested, I'll add this note at the bottom of creating yaml values

```
.. _kubernetes-configuration-best-practices:

.. note::

   Although ``values.yaml`` is used to refer to the Kubernetes configuration
   file in this document, you should use clear naming guidelines for the cluster
   and deployment you are managing. For example, ``cluster-a-trino-etl.yaml``
   might refer to a Trino deployment for a cluster used primarily for 
   extract-transform-load queries deployed on the ``a`` Kubernetes cluster. See
   `Configuration Best Practices <https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/overview/>`_
   for more tips on configuring Kubernetes deployments.
```

Then I'll link to this location any time it's relevant. WDYT?

Author: Spoke with @mosabua , and we said this works, but we should change `values.yaml` to `example.yaml`.

   * *(Optional)* To override the default values,
     :ref:`create your own values.yaml <creating-your-own-values-yaml>` to
     define the parameters of your deployment. To run the install command using

>      the ``values.yaml``, add the ``f`` parameter in you ``install`` command.

Reviewer 2: change filename

     .. code-block:: text

>          helm install -f values.yaml my-trino-cluster trino/trino

Reviewer 2: change filename

   You should see output as follows:

   .. code-block:: text

       NAME: my-trino-cluster
       LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Sep 13 14:12:09 2022
       NAMESPACE: default
       STATUS: deployed
       REVISION: 1
       TEST SUITE: None
       NOTES:
       Get the application URL by running these commands:
         export POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods --namespace default -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o jsonpath="{.items[0].metadata.name}")
         echo "Visit http://127.0.0.1:8080 to use your application"
         kubectl port-forward $POD_NAME 8080:8080

>    This output depends on your ``values.yaml`` configuration and cluster name.

Reviewer 2: drop values.yaml

   For example, the port ``8080`` is set by the ``.service.port`` in the

>    ``values.yaml``.

Reviewer 2: change filename

#. Run the following command to check that all pods, deployments, and services
   are running properly.

   .. code-block:: text

      kubectl get all

>    You should expect to see output that shows running pods, deployments, and

Reviewer 2: The output shows running pods, ...

   replica sets. A good indicator that everything is running properly is to see

>    all pods are returning a ready status in the  ``READY`` column.

Reviewer 2: you mean a "Running" status in the STATUS column

or a 

1/1 in the READY column

       pod/my-trino-cluster-coordinator-bfb74c98d-rnrxd   1/1     Running   0          161m
       pod/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6-hvl8n       1/1     Running   0          161m
       pod/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6-tcqgb       1/1     Running   0          161m

       NAME                       TYPE        CLUSTER-IP    EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
       service/my-trino-cluster   ClusterIP   10.96.25.35   <none>        8080/TCP   161m

       NAME                                           READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
       deployment.apps/my-trino-cluster-coordinator   1/1     1            1           161m
       deployment.apps/my-trino-cluster-worker        2/2     2            2           161m

       NAME                                                     DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-coordinator-bfb74c98d   1         1         1       161m
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6       2         2         2       161m

   * The top three lines are pods. These include the actual Trino containers.

   * The next line is the service. This is a mechanism by which Kubernetes makes

>      internal services like the one running on the coordinator accessible

Reviewer 2: like the discovery service running on the coordinator

Reviewer 2: Also .. I assume the chart handles that automatically so that the workers can contact the coordinator

Reviewer 3: If you talk purely from a chart's perspective then you can remove all explanations since it can be considered implementation detail of the chart. The `service` in this case indeed gets created by the chart - nothing the user needs to do. I think this paragraph and explanation of output above is explaining k8s concepts more than anything specific to Trino or the charts.

Author: @mosabua and @hashhar, perhaps we should remove this section and just link to these resources:

[kubectl get reference](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubectl/kubectl-commands#get)
[example](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/_print/#docker-ps)

WDYT?

     within the cluster by using a name instead of IPs.

   * The next two lines are the deployments. Deployments contain logic around
     how upgrades are performed, and manage pods through replica sets.
     In the case of ``my-trino-cluster-worker`` deployment, there are multiple
     pods. Notice that the ``my-trino-cluster-coordinator`` always has one pod.

   * The final two lines are the replica sets. This defines how many instances
     of a given pod should be available during a ready state. This is the way

>      to scale out the deployments.

Reviewer 2: Might need to mention that scaling is only done by adding workers.. or using larger pods ..

   state, Trino has been successfully deployed.

.. note::

      Unlike some Kubernetes applications, where it's better to have many small
      pods, Trino works best with fewer pods each having more resources
      available. We strongly recommend to avoid having multiple Trino pods on a
      single physical host to avoid contention for resources.

Executing queries
-----------------

The pods running the Trino containers are all running on a private network
internal to Kubernetes. In order to access them, specifically the coordinator,
you need to create a tunnel to the coordinator pod and your computer. You can do
this by running the commands generated upon installation.

#. Store the coordinator pod name in a shell variable called ``POD_NAME``.

   .. code-block:: text

       POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o name)

#. Create the tunnel from the coordinator pod to the client.

   .. code-block:: text

       kubectl port-forward $POD_NAME 8080:8080

   Now you can connect to the Trino coordinator at ``http://localhost:8080``.

#. To connect to Trino, you can use the
   :doc:`commond-line interface </client/cli>`, a

>    :doc:`jdbc client </client/jdbc>`, or any of the

Reviewer 2: JDBC

   :doc:`other clients </client>`. For this example,
   :ref:`install the command-line interface <cli-installation>`, and connect to
   Trino in a new console session.

   .. code-block:: text

       trino --server http://localhost:8080

#. Using the sample data in the ``tpch`` catalog, type and execute a query on
   the ``nation`` table using the ``tiny`` schema. Try other

>    commands to explore this data set:

Reviewer 2: schema:

code block 

Try other SQL queries to explore the data set and test your cluster.

   .. code-block:: text

       trino> select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nation;
        _col0
       -------
         25
       (1 row)

       Query 20181105_001601_00002_e6r6y, FINISHED, 1 node
       Splits: 21 total, 21 done (100.00%)
       0:06 [25 rows, 0B] [4 rows/s, 0B/s]

#. Once you are done with your exploration, enter the ``quit`` command in the
   CLI.

> #. Kill the tunnel to the coordinator pod. The is only alive while the kubectl

Reviewer 2: The tunnel is only available while

   process is running, so you can just kill the ``kubectl`` process that's

>    forwarding the port. In most cases that'll just mean pressing ``CTRL`` + ``C``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   forwarding the port. In most cases that means pressing ``CTRL`` + ``C``
```

   in the terminal where the port-forward command is running.

Configuration
-------------

> The helm chart uses the :doc:`Trino container image </installation/containers>`

Reviewer 2: Helm

> by default. The Docker image already contains a default configuration to get

Reviewer 2: drop "by default"

started, and some catalogs to allow you to explore Trino. Kubernetes allows you
to mimic a :doc:`traditional deployment </installation/deployment>` by updating

> the ``values.yaml`` file. It's important to understand how files such as the

Reviewer 2: by supplying configuration in YAML files.

Trino configuration, JVM, and various :doc:`catalog properties </connector>` are
configured in Trino before updating the values.

.. _creating-your-own-values-yaml:

> Creating your own values.yaml

Reviewer 2: your own YAML configuration file

"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

When you use your own ``values.yaml``, you only override the values you specify.
The remaining properties use their default values. Add a ``values.yaml`` with
the following configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

   image:
     tag: "|trino_version|"
   server:

>      workers: 2

Reviewer 2: what is the default? I thought default is already 2....

Author: but fair I'll change it to 3 :)

     config:
       memory:
         heapHeadroomPerNode: "1GB"
       query:
         maxMemory: "4GB"
         maxMemoryPerNode: "1GB"
   coordinator:
     jvm:
       maxHeapSize: "8G"
   worker:
     jvm:
       maxHeapSize: "8G"

These values are higher than the defaults and allow Trino to use more memory
and run more demanding queries. If the values are too high, Kubernetes might
not be able to schedule some Trino pods, depending on other applications
deployed in this cluster and the size of the cluster nodes.

#. ``.image.tag`` is set to the current version, |trino_version|. Set
   this value if you need to use a specific version of Trino. The default is

>    ``latest``.

Reviewer 2: we should explain here that you should set a version .. otherwise each time you run the command you might get a new version used since latest changes every week .. (with each release)

> #. ``.server.workers`` is set to ``2``. This value sets the number of

Reviewer 2: change to 3 ??

   workers, in this case, a coordinator and two worker nodes are deployed.

> #. ``.server.config.memory.heapHeadroomPerNode`` is set to ``1GB``.

Reviewer 2: I am inclined to suggest that we move the config stuff out into a separate section or remove for now .. the only thing that should really be needed is adjusting the JVM heapsize to the pod size .. for the rest the defaults should suffice .. and if not its an advanced topic to dive deeper into this and should not be in this simple beginner example

   This sets the :ref:`prop-resource-memory-heap-headroom-per-node` property.
#. ``.server.config.query.maxMemory`` is set to ``4GB``.
   This sets the :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory` property.
#. ``.server.config.query.maxMemoryPerNode`` is set to ``1GB``.
   This sets the :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory-per-node` property.
#. ``.coordinator.jvm.maxHeapSize`` is set to ``8GB``.
   This sets the maximum heap size in the JVM of the coordinator. See
   :ref:`jvm_config`.
#. ``.worker.jvm.maxHeapSize`` is set to ``8GB``.
   This sets the maximum heap size in the JVM of the worker. See
   :ref:`jvm_config`.

>    .. warning::

Reviewer 2: Empty line and unindent

      These memory settings need to be tuned carefully as setting some values
      outside of the range of the maximum heap size will cause Trino startup to
      fail. See the warnings listed on :doc:`/admin/properties-resource-management`.

> The ``values.yaml`` has

Reviewer 2: Not sure what you want to say with this sentence .

Author: just want to refer to the properties list on the chart, fixed wording.

`various properties <https://trinodb.github.io/charts/charts/trino/>`_
that, when not empty, create configuration files in the ``/etc/trino`` directory
structure as created in the :doc:`/installation/deployment`.

> Adding catalogs to Helm deployments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding catalogs
```

"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> A common use-case is to add custom catalogs to the Kubernetes deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A common use-case is to add custom catalogs.
```

You can do this by adding values to the ``additionalCatalogs`` property in the
``values.yaml`` file.

.. code-block:: yaml

    additionalCatalogs:
      lakehouse.properties: |-
        connector.name=iceberg
        hive.metastore.uri=thrift://example.net:9083
      rdbms.properties: |-
        connector.name=postgresql
        connection-url=jdbc:postgresql://example.net:5432/database
        connection-user=root
        connection-password=secret

This adds both ``lakehouse`` and ``rdbms`` catalogs to the Kubernetes deployment
configuration.

.. _running-a-local-kubernetes-cluster-with-kind:

Running a local Kubernetes cluster with kind
--------------------------------------------

> For local deployments, you can optionally use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For local deployments, you can use
```

`kind (Kubernetes in Docker) <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io>`_. Follow the steps
below to run ``kind`` on your system.

#. ``kind`` runs on `Docker <https://www.docker.com>`_, so first check if Docker
   is installed:

   .. code-block:: text

      docker --version

>    If this command fails, install Docker by following

Reviewer 2: following the

   `Docker installation instructions <https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/>`_.

> #. Install ``kind`` by following

Reviewer 2: following the

   `kind installation instructions <https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/#installation>`_.

#. Run a Kubernetes cluster in ``kind`` by running the command:

   .. code-block:: text

      kind create cluster --name trino

   .. note::

>       The ``name`` parameter here is optional but is just used to showcase how

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      The ``name`` parameter is optional but is used to showcase how
```

      the namespace is applied in future commands. The cluster name defaults to
      ``kind`` if no parameter is added. Use ``trino`` to make the application
      on this cluster obvious.

#. Verify that ``kubectl`` is running against the correct Kubernetes cluster.

   .. code-block:: text

      kubectl cluster-info --context kind-trino

   If you have multiple Kubernetes clusters already configured within
   ``~/.kube/config``, you need to pass the ``context`` parameter to the
   ``kubectl`` commands to operate with the local ``kind`` cluster. ``kubectl``
   uses the
   `default context <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#kubectl-context-and-configuration>`_
   if this parameter isn't supplied. Notice the context is the name of the
   cluster with the ``kind-`` prefix added. Now you can look at all the
   Kubernetes objects running on your ``kind`` cluster.

> #. Set up Trino by folling the `Running Trino using Helm`_ steps. When running

Reviewer 2: dont use absolute link to title .. set an anchor and use ref link

   the ``kubectl get all`` command, add the ``context`` parameter.

   .. code-block:: text

      kubectl get all --context kind-trino

#. Run some queries by following the `Executing queries`_ steps.

#. Once you are done with the cluster using kind, you can delete the cluster.

   .. code-block:: text

      kind delete cluster -n trino

Cleaning up
-----------

> To uninstall the helm release, and all the Kubernetes instances deployed with it,

Reviewer 2: Helm release 

but what do you mean anyway

would it be better to say

To uninstall Trino from the Kubernetes cluster, run the following command:

     the ``values.yaml``, add the ``f`` parameter in you ``install`` command.

     .. code-block:: text

         helm install -f values.yaml my-trino-cluster trino/trino

   You should see output as follows:

   .. code-block:: text

       NAME: my-trino-cluster
       LAST DEPLOYED: Tue Sep 13 14:12:09 2022
       NAMESPACE: default
       STATUS: deployed
       REVISION: 1
       TEST SUITE: None
       NOTES:
       Get the application URL by running these commands:
         export POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods --namespace default -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o jsonpath="{.items[0].metadata.name}")
         echo "Visit http://127.0.0.1:8080 to use your application"
         kubectl port-forward $POD_NAME 8080:8080

   This output depends on your ``values.yaml`` configuration and cluster name.
   For example, the port ``8080`` is set by the ``.service.port`` in the
   ``values.yaml``.

#. Run the following command to check that all pods, deployments, and services are
   running properly.

   .. code-block:: text

      kubectl get all

   You should expect to see output that shows running pods, deployments, and

>    replica sets in the ready state.

Reviewer 3: "ready state" doesn't map directly to anything in the output. What else can we say? I think key is to see if pods have 1/1 in READY column (everything else should be good if that is good ideally).

       NAME                                                     DESIRED   CURRENT   READY   AGE
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-coordinator-bfb74c98d   1         1         1       161m
       replicaset.apps/my-trino-cluster-worker-76f6bf54d6       2         2         2       161m

   * The top three lines are pods. These include the actual Trino containers.

   * The next line is the service. This is a mechanism by which Kubernetes makes
     internal services like the one running on the coordinator accessible
     within the cluster by using a name instead of IPs.

   * The next two lines are the deployments. Deployments contain logic around
     how upgrades are performed, and manage pods through replica sets.
     In the case of ``my-trino-cluster-worker`` deployment, there are multiple
     pods. Notice that the ``my-trino-cluster-coordinator`` always has one pod.

   * The final two lines are the replica sets. This defines how many instances
     of a given pod should be available during a ready state. This is the way
     to scale out the deployments.

#. If all pods, deployments, and replica sets are running and in the ready

>    state, Trino has been successfully deployed.

Reviewer 3: "ready state" doesn't map directly to anything in the output. What else can we say? I think key is to see if pods have 1/1 in READY column (everything else should be good if that is good ideally).

   .. code-block:: text

       POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods -l "app=trino,release=my-trino-cluster,component=coordinator" -o name)

#. Create the tunnel from the coordinator pod to the client.

   .. code-block:: text

       kubectl port-forward $POD_NAME 8080:8080

   Now you can connect to the Trino coordinator at ``http://localhost:8080``.

#. To connect to Trino, you can use the
   :doc:`commond-line interface </client/cli>`, a
   :doc:`jdbc client </client/jdbc>`, or any of the
   :doc:`other clients </client>`. For this example,
   :ref:`install the command-line interface <cli-installation>`, and connect to
   Trino in a new console session.

   .. code-block:: text

       trino --server http://localhost:8080

#. Using the sample data in the ``tpch`` catalog, type and execute a query on
   the ``nation`` table using the ``tiny`` schema. Try other
   commands to explore this data set:

   .. code-block:: text

       trino> select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nation;
        _col0
       -------
         25
       (1 row)

       Query 20181105_001601_00002_e6r6y, FINISHED, 1 node
       Splits: 21 total, 21 done (100.00%)
       0:06 [25 rows, 0B] [4 rows/s, 0B/s]

> #. Once you are done with your exploration, enter the ``quit`` command in the.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Once you are done with your exploration, enter the ``quit`` command in the CLI.
```

#. Kill the tunnel to the coordinator pod. The is only alive while the kubectl
   process is running, so you can just kill the kubectl process that's
   forwarding the port. In most cases that'll just mean pressing ``CTRL`` + ``C``
   in the terminal where the port-forward command is running. If you run that
   command in the background, you can run the following command to kill the
   process:

   .. code-block:: text

>        pkill kubectl -9

Reviewer 3: destructive option - also for anyone who had enough knowledge on how to run it in background without us guiding them to do so probably knows how to handle it as well.

deployed in this cluster and the size of the cluster nodes.

#. ``.image.tag`` is set to the current version, |trino_version|. Set
   this value if you need to use a specific version of Trino. The default is
   ``latest``.
#. ``.server.workers`` is set to ``2``. This value sets the number of
   workers, in this case, a coordinator and two worker nodes are deployed.
#. ``.server.config.memory.heapHeadroomPerNode`` is set to ``1GB``.
   This sets the :ref:`prop-resource-memory-heap-headroom-per-node` property.
#. ``.server.config.query.maxMemory`` is set to ``4GB``.
   This sets the :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory` property.
#. ``.server.config.query.maxMemoryPerNode`` is set to ``1GB``.
   This sets the :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory-per-node` property.
#. ``.coordinator.jvm.maxHeapSize`` is set to ``8GB``.
   This sets the maximum heap size in the JVM in the :ref:`jvm_config` on the
   coordinator.
#. ``.worker.jvm.maxHeapSize`` is set to ``8GB``.
   This sets the maximum heap size in the JVM in the :ref:`jvm_config` on the
   worker.

   .. warning::
      When updating memory configurations, you need to make sure that

>       :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory` is greater than
>       :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory-per-node`. Also make sure that the
>       sum of :ref:`prop-resource-query-max-memory-per-node` and
>       :ref:`prop-resource-memory-heap-headroom-per-node` is less than the
>       ``worker.jvm.maxHeapSize`` property.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      ``.server.config.query.maxMemory`` is greater than
      ``.server.config.query.maxMemoryPerNode``. Also make sure that the
      sum of ``.server.config.query.maxMemoryPerNode`` and
      ``.server.config.memory.heapHeadroomPerNode`` is less than the
      ``worker.jvm.maxHeapSize`` property.
```

(if we keep this here otherwise see below)

BTW it'd probably be better to move this warning to the resource management properties page and link to that from here.

Author: Moved them over and updated the warning to check that page.

#. Run a Kubernetes cluster in ``kind`` by running the command:

   .. code-block:: text

      kind create cluster --name trino

   .. note::

      The ``name`` parameter here is optional but is just used to showcase how
      the namespace is applied in future commands. The cluster name defaults to
      ``kind`` if no parameter is added. Use ``trino`` to make the application
      on this cluster obvious.

#. Verify that ``kubectl`` is running against the correct Kubernetes cluster.

   .. code-block:: text

      kubectl cluster-info --context kind-trino

   If you have multiple Kubernetes clusters already configured within
   ``~/.kube/config``, you need to pass the ``context`` parameter to the
   ``kubectl`` commands to operate with the local ``kind`` cluster. ``kubectl``
   uses the
   `default context <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#kubectl-context-and-configuration>`_
   if this parameter isn't supplied. Notice the context is the name of the
   cluster with the ``kind-`` prefix added. Now you can look at all the
   Kubernetes objects running on your ``kind`` cluster.

   .. code-block:: text

      kubectl get all --context kind-trino

> #. Once you are done with the cluster using kind, you can delete the cluster.

Reviewer 3: before this do we want to link "back" to the steps of helm install etc?
